Euphoria is an American teen drama television series created and principally written by Sam Levinson for HBO. It is based on the Israeli miniseries of the same name created by Ron Leshem and Daphna Levin. The series stars Zendaya, Maude Apatow, Angus Cloud, Eric Dane, Alexa Demie, Jacob Elordi, Barbie Ferreira, Nika King, Storm Reid, Hunter Schafer, Algee Smith, and Sydney Sweeney in main roles. The series follows Rue Bennett (Zendaya), a troubled teenage drug addict who struggles to get sober, find her place in the world, and adjust to her relationships after rehab. Though Rue is the central focus of the show, the beginning of most episodes provides backstories for the rest of the main characters.Euphoria's executive producers include Levinson, Canadian rapper and singer Drake, Zendaya, Ron Leshem, and Gary Lennon. The series is filmed at Ulysses S. Grant High School in Los Angeles, California, Sony Pictures Studios in Culver City, California, and Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank, California. Outside California, it is filmed at Warner Bros. Studios in Leavesden, Hertfordshire, and in Dublin, London, New York City, Rome, and Singapore. The series has received generally positive reviews, with praise for its cinematography, score, performances of the cast, and approach to its mature subject matter. It has also been a subject of controversy for its nudity and sexual content, which critics found excessive due to the high school setting and its teenage characters. It is the fourth most-watched series in HBO history, behind Game of Thrones, The Last of Us, and House of the Dragon. The show additionally shares the same universe as Levinson's 2023 television series The Idol.The first season of Euphoria premiered on June 16, 2019. Two one-hour specials were broadcast in December 2020 and January 2021. The second season premiered on January 9, 2022. In February 2022, the series was renewed for a third season. Filming was halted due to the 2023 Hollywood labor disputes and the unexpected deaths of Cloud and executive producer Kevin Turen. The third season of Euphoria was initially expected to enter production in December 2023 but was eventually postponed indefinitely. On June 13, 2024, it was confirmed that the show will resume production for its third season, with the third season of the show presumably being set away from the high school setting of the first two seasons.The series has received numerous accolades, including a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series. For her performance, Zendaya has won two Primetime Emmy Awards, a Critics' Choice Television Award, and a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress for her performance as Rue. Sweeney, Colman Domingo, and Martha Kelly have also received Emmy nominations for their acting, with Domingo winning Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series for his performance as Ali.Euphoria follows high schoolers in the fictional town of East Highland, California, who seek hope while balancing the strains of love, loss, sex, and addiction. Topics such as child abuse, drug abuse, toxic relationships, toxic positivity, hookup culture, revenge porn, blackmail,  codependency, abortion, infidelity, relapsing, gender transition, repressed homosexuality, sobriety, human trafficking, domestic violence, rape, self-harm, toxic masculinity, drug dealing, dating violence, mental illness, mental health, anger issues, temper tantrum, hallucination, theft, attempted murder, alcoholism and grief are explored during the show.An 11-year-old Nathaniel Jacobs discovers his father's porn collection of homemade videos featuring him having sex with young gay men and transgender women. Nate becomes a successful quarterback who struggles with anger issues and sexual insecurities. In the present, Nate breaks into Tyler's house and severely beats him, accusing him of raping underage Maddy at McKay's party after Maddy falsely told him she blacked out. On the first day of school, Rue breaks down in front of the class after being asked to talk about her summer. Afterwards, Cassie's sister Lexi attempts to comfort her, but she lashes out. Rue reminisces about trying oxycodone for the first time at 13, stealing from her dying father's prescription. Kat discovers that the amateur video of her having sex at McKay's party is popular online and realizes she can make money as a camgirl. Jules starts messaging on the dating app with Nate, who catfishes her by adopting the name "Tyler" and the username "shyguy118". McKay spends time with Cassie and accuses her of being too sexual. Mouse, Fezco's intimidating supplier, coerces Rue into trying fentanyl.A young Katherine Hernandez abruptly gains weight on a family vacation. Her middle-school boyfriend, Daniel, breaks up with her. She retreats into the world of romance and becomes a popular online fan fiction writer. In the present, Kat starts to work as a camgirl, catering to a series of submissive men with financial domination fetishes. Jules tells Rue she will stop being friends with her if she keeps using drugs. At her Narcotics Anonymous meeting, Rue says she is 60 days sober; another attendee, Ali, tells her he knows she is lying. Rue helps Jules take nude photos of herself after Nate sends her a "dick pic", and she steals pills from Jules's kitchen. Maddy is shocked to find pictures of penises on Nate's phone. Rue and Jules argue after Jules reveals her plans to meet "Tyler" alone at night. Shortly thereafter, Rue goes to Jules's house to apologize and ends up kissing her. Panicked at the thought of alienating Jules, Rue visits Fez to get drugs, but, afraid for her well-being, he refuses to sell her any and locks her out of his house. Upset, Rue blames Fez for her addiction. She calls Ali for help.An 11-year-old Jules Vaughn is admitted to a psychiatric hospital by her mother because of her depression and problems with self-harming. Later, her parents separate and she begins transitioning to deal with her gender dysphoria. In the present day, at a carnival, Nate and Maddy have an argument, and Nate grabs her by the throat after she insults his family. McKay upsets Cassie by refusing to acknowledge her as his girlfriend. Cassie and Maddy take MDMA, and Cassie flirts with a classmate, Kat's childhood sweetheart Daniel. Jules recognizes Cal as her hookup. Kat hangs out with a classmate, Ethan (who has a crush on her), but becomes jealous when she incorrectly assumes he is flirting with another girl and ends up having sex with an older boy. Rue looks for her sister, Gia, and finds her high on marijuana. Cal confronts Jules, begging her not to reveal their secret; she assures him that she will not tell anyone. After the carnival, Jules meets up with "Tyler" and discovers he is Nate. Nate blackmails her, threatening to report the nude pictures Jules has sent him as child pornography unless she keeps quiet about her relationship with his father. Jules goes to Rue's house and they kiss.As a child, Madeleine Perez lost interest in the idea of working after her mother stopped her from participating in beauty pageants. She eventually found herself in a toxic relationship with Nate, culminating in his attack on her at the carnival. In the present day, Rue tells her mother that she is dating Jules. Maddy tries to hide the injuries on her neck, but they are discovered after she passes out at school and a police investigation begins; Maddy's mother presses charges against Nate. Jules gets frustrated when Rue dismisses her situation with Cal. Ali does not believe that Rue's and Jules's relationship will last, scaring Rue. Cassie reconciles with McKay, who apologizes for his behavior at the carnival. Kat is cold toward Ethan, who does not understand why. Kat has a sexual encounter with a clothing store clerk about whom she had previously fantasized. Rue apologizes to Lexi for having been a bad friend and invites her to go roller skating with her and Jules. Cal questions the effects his secret sexuality has had on his children. Maddy meets Nate at a motel. After rollerskating, Jules takes Rue home with her, but cannot sleep.Growing up, Christopher McKay is coached by his father to become a successful football player. When he reaches college, he realizes he has little chance of being recruited by a professional team. In the present day, Nate is suspended from school and socially ostracized. Nate breaks into Tyler's apartment and coerces him into confessing to choking Maddy. He also blackmails Jules into telling the police that she saw Tyler attack Maddy. Cassie attends a Halloween party with McKay, where he is violently hazed and dry humped by his fraternity brothers. He then has aggressive sex with Cassie, which leaves her in tears. The next night, Daniel hosts a party. Rue worries about Jules, who is drinking heavily and expresses uncertainty about her relationship. Rue apologizes to Fez for lashing out at him. Kat hooks up with Ethan but ditches him when he visits the bathroom. When Cassie refuses to have sex with Daniel, he insults her. At home, Cassie realizes her period is late. Nate and Maddy arrive at Daniel's party and are applauded by the partygoers. Rue becomes suspicious when she sees Jules's reaction.Rue and Jules reconcile as Rue recovers in the hospital after a kidney infection. Nate is unable to sexually perform with Maddy, who confronts him about his sexuality, after which Nate attacks her. Maddy steals the video of Cal and Jules that Nate has in his possession, later watching it in shock. Nate wins his final high-school football game, but Cal criticizes his performance. Nate attempts to fight him but after being subdued, begins to hit himself, leaving Cal shaken. Cassie terminates her pregnancy with her family's support. Fez breaks into Mouse's supplier's house and robs him in order to pay Mouse. At their school's winter formal, Kat seeks out Ethan and apologizes for her behavior. Rue confronts Nate, threatening to expose Cal. Nate taunts her about Jules's loyalty. After spending the night trying to make each other jealous, Nate and Maddy decide to peacefully end their relationship. Jules tells Rue that she is in love with both her and Anna. Rue and Jules decide to run away from their town together, but Rue backs out at the last minute and Jules leaves on a train alone. A heartbroken Rue returns home and relapses, experiencing a vivid, musical hallucination.As a child, Fezco O'Neill was taken under his grandmother's wing and introduced to the drug trade. A baby Ashtray was abandoned by his addict mother. Fez experienced a traumatic head injury from a crowbar accident. In the present, Ash kills Mouse with a hammer. Several weeks later, on New Year's Eve, an intoxicated Rue accompanies Fez and Ash to an intense drug deal with associates of retired-schoolmistress-turned-dealer Laurie before attending a large house party. After encountering each other at a convenience store, Nate and Cassie impulsively have sex in a bathroom at the party and are nearly caught by Maddy. Rue takes a spate of drugs with a student named Elliot and nearly overdoses. She reunites with Jules and admits to relapsing the night Jules left her at the train station. The two later confess their feelings for one another and kiss. Fez flatters Lexi and gets her number, then confronts Nate, whom he viciously beats until the other guests stop him.Nate recovers from his beating at the hospital, refusing to tell his father who attacked him. Cassie, who has experienced a depressive episode since her abortion, continues seeing Nate despite knowing it could ruin her friendship with Maddy. Jules becomes insecure about Rue's friendship with Elliot, unaware the two have been regularly taking drugs together. Kat's interest in Ethan begins to wane over her own issues with self-esteem. Cal investigates Nate's assault and pressures Cassie into naming Fez as the attacker. He later confronts Nate, who responds by revealing he knows of his father's secret sexual exploits, including the video of him and Jules.The title of this episode is a reference to the 1984 Hall & Oates song "Out of Touch".As a teenager, Cal was attracted to his friend Derek while dating his future wife, Marsha. Derek reciprocated his feelings, but Marsha's unexpected pregnancy compelled Cal to stay with her and hide his sexual orientation. In the present, Rue develops a plan to hide her drug use from Jules and Gia. When she runs out of drugs, she convinces Laurie to give her a large stash, ostensibly for Rue to sell. Ali becomes suspicious of Rue, causing a vicious argument that leads them to cut ties. Cassie becomes further isolated due to her obsession with Nate. Lexi channels her frustrations with Cassie and Rue, as well as her own loneliness, into writing a play to stage at school. Cal visits Fez, thinking he has the video of Jules, but Ashtray beats him into admitting his indiscretions. Fez lets him go on the condition that he stops hunting him and keeps Nate away from Rue and Jules. Nate cancels plans with Cassie to rekindle his relationship with Maddy.While by themselves one night, Jules and Elliot kiss. Cassie and Nate's relationship becomes strained after he admits to having resumed talking to Maddy. The Howards host a birthday party for Maddy, where Cassie gets exceedingly drunk and later vomits in the hot tub as Maddy is yelling at Nate for always smooth-talking her back into a relationship. Rue, Jules and Elliot rob a convenience store for White Claw. Jules questions Rue for drinking, angering Rue and compelling her to go back home. She pops four pills and hallucinates her father in a church, also seeing Labrinth singing. Cal gets drunk and drives to the gay bar where he first kissed Derek; after getting thrown out, he returns home, drunkenly berates his family for not allowing him to be open about his sexuality, and abruptly decides to leave them. Elliot discloses Rue's ongoing drug use to Jules. Jules is devastated but sleeps with Elliot nonetheless.Rue's suitcase of drugs she acquired from Laurie is missing; her mother Leslie learned of her relapse from Jules and reveals she threw it out. Rue in turn has a violent meltdown at her mother and sister, as well as Jules and Elliot, who are there for the intervention. On the car ride to rehab, she runs away and goes to Lexi's house; her mother and friends are there for the intervention. Rue reveals Cassie's and Nate's relationship, causing chaos and allowing her to get away. She goes to Fez's place, but he throws her out when she tries stealing his grandmother's medication. She burgles a house, getting cash and jewelry to start paying back Laurie for the drugs. Reeling from withdrawal, Rue narrowly outruns and hides from the police, and reaches Laurie's apartment. Laurie mothers Rue, giving her a bath and pharmaceutical morphine for the pain, but implies she will force Rue to prostitute herself to pay her debts. Rue wakes up early the next morning, sneaks out of the apartment, and returns home.Two weeks after returning home, Rue makes progress in recovering from withdrawal, reconciling with Ali in the process. Kat and Ethan break up. Cassie and Nate struggle with their secret being out and argue with their mothers. Cassie's stress makes Lexi wonder how her play will be received. Fez is housing Faye, the girlfriend of his associate Custer, whom he hasn't seen since the deal with Laurie; Custer privately meets Faye and reveals he is a police informant working to bring down Fez and Ashtray for Mouse's murder. Nate goes to Maddy's house and forces her at gunpoint to give up the disc containing the video of Cal and Jules. He then gives Jules the disc, apologizing for his past behavior; the two admit the feelings they expressed to each other by text message the previous year were genuine. Leslie learns no inpatient facility has room for Rue and breaks down, fearing Rue will kill herself without treatment.Jules destroys the disc Nate gave her. Leslie tells Rue she is done dealing with her drug addiction and plans to focus on Gia. Maddy wishes to leave East Highland after the end of the school year, feeling there is nothing to keep her there. Lexi's play, Our Life, is performed for East Highland's students, parents and faculty; the students quickly realize the play is based on their lives. The play shows various significant events from Lexi's perspective, such as Rue's father's wake, Cassie's puberty, Rue's and Lexi's friendship, Cassie and Maddy's friendship, and Maddy and Nate's relationship. Fez fails to make it to the play despite promising Lexi he would be there. Ethan, playing Nate, performs a homoerotic rendition of "Holding Out for a Hero" with other male students; an offended Nate storms out of the play and angrily breaks up with Cassie, who is enraged.Cassie disrupts the play when she rushes the stage and berates Lexi, only to be chased backstage and attacked by Maddy. Lexi finishes her play with the crew's and audience's support. Fez is visited by Custer, who is wearing a wire. Ashtray realizes Custer is a police informant and fatally stabs him, while Fez destroys his phone. Police storm the compound; Ashtray locks himself in the bathroom and engages in a shootout with the police. He is shot and a wounded Fez is arrested. Nate confronts Cal with a flash drive containing all of Cal's explicit videos, before the police, tipped off by Nate, come to arrest Cal. In the aftermath of their brawl, Cassie confesses to Maddy that Nate dumped her, to which she responds that this is just the beginning of what Cassie will have to endure. After the play, Jules tells Rue that she loves and misses her. Rue narrates that she stayed clean for the rest of the school year and is cautiously optimistic about the future.The title of this episode is a reference to André Breton's "Mad Love".In 2006, Sam Levinson began drafting different versions of what eventually became Euphoria, based on his experience with drugs as a teenager. He was invited to a meeting with HBO about an adaptation of the 2012 Israeli television series Euphoria created by Ron Leshem, Daphna Levin, and Tamira Yardeni. In 2019, Levinson said HBO's head of drama, Francesca Orsi, liked the "raw and honest" portrayal of drug use and other teenage problems in the Israeli series. In a press release, Orsi described the series as "Kids meets Trainspotting" with no parental supervision.The concept for Euphoria was based on Levinson's personal experiences as a teenager and his struggles with anxiety, depression, and drug addiction. In a meeting with Orsi, he recalled: "We just had a conversation about just life and her life and my life and various struggles that, you know, we've been through and things and she said, 'Great, you know, well go and write that' and I said 'What?' and she goes 'Everything we just talked about'". Levinson has also cited teenage anxiety as a whole as an influence for the series: "There is this consistent anxiety that I think exists in this generation that I think informed the whole filmmaking process."In June 2017, it was reported that the series was in development at HBO.Euphoria is a co-production of The Reasonable Bunch, A24, Little Lamb, DreamCrew, and HBO Entertainment. It has 16 executive producers, including Levinson, Leshem, Levin, Yardeni, Hadas Mozes Lichtenstein, Mirit Toovi, Yoram Mokadi, Gary Lennon, Zendaya, Canadian rapper Drake, Future the Prince, Ravi Nandan, and Kevin Turen. The pilot episode was directed by Augustine Frizzell.Levinson has served as Euphoria's showrunner since its premiere, and has written every episode. He has directed every episode except the pilot and the season one episodes "03 Bonnie and Clyde" and "The Next Episode", which were directed by Jennifer Morrison and Pippa Bianco.The production was given a pilot order on March 13, 2018, and on July 30, it was announced that HBO had given the production a series order. The series was renewed for a second season on July 11, 2019.Out of respect for the actors and extras involved, filming of nudity was conducted on a closed set, and for sex scenes, an intimacy coordinator was used.Production for season two was scheduled to start in the second quarter of 2020, with the first table read on March 11, but the COVID-19 pandemic delayed the production. Production resumed in March 2021, with filming from April to November. HBO defended the series against allegations of a toxic work environment during the production of the second season, writing: "The well-being of cast and crew on our productions is always a top priority. The production was in full compliance with all safety guidelines and guild protocols. It's not uncommon for drama series to have complex shoots, and COVID protocols add an additional layer. We maintain an open line of communication with all the guilds, including SAG-AFTRA. There were never any formal inquiries raised."Before the series' second season, HBO ordered two specials. The first, "Trouble Don't Last Always", premiered on December 6, 2020, and follows Rue as she deals with the aftermath of leaving Jules at the train station and relapsing. The second, "Fuck Anyone Who's Not a Sea Blob", premiered on January 24, 2021, and follows Jules's side of the story. The second episode was co-written and executive produced by Levinson and Hunter Schafer. HBO announced that the special episodes would air two days early on HBO Max.On February 4, 2022, HBO renewed the series for a third season. In September 2022, HBO's CEO Casey Bloys said the series could go beyond four seasons, and would not end after season three. Production of season three was set to start in February 2023, aiming for a late 2023 release, but according to a Vogue interview with Apatow, filming was set to start in the second half of 2023. On a podcast, series costume designer Heidi Bivens said that preparations would begin in May 2023, with filming starting in June 2023. The third season production was disrupted by the 2023 Writers Guild of America strike, with Jeremy O. Harris calling out to David Zaslav, saying, "He's not a scab. David Zaslav, make a deal. That's what I'll say about Season 3 of 'Euphoria.' Make a deal, David. It's easy. Just come to that table." In May 2023, HBO confirmed the season would premiere by 2025. The production for season three started in December 2023. On March 12, 2024, Sydney Sweeney revealed in an MTV interview with Josh Horowitz that filming for the third season was due to "start soon". However on March 25, 2024, it was reported shooting was postponed indefinitely amidst speculation that the series would not return. HBO announced on July 12, 2024 that castmembers had signed on for a third season which would aim for a January 2025 start date. In August 2024, while appearing on an episode of "Call Her Daddy" with Alex Cooper, Hunter Schafer stated, "The real tea is I have no f-king idea what's going on" with production on the series' third season. In June 2018, it was announced that the pilot would star Zendaya, Storm Reid, Maude Apatow, Astro, Eric Dane, Angus Cloud, Alexa Demie, Jacob Elordi, Barbie Ferreira, Nika King, Hunter Schafer, and Sydney Sweeney. In October, Algee Smith was cast to replace Astro as McKay, and Austin Abrams had also been cast. Astro reportedly quit the series after shooting the pilot as he was uncomfortable with the sexual content involving his character.In April 2020, Kelvin Harrison Jr. joined the cast, but by May 2021, he had dropped out due to scheduling conflicts as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In August, Dominic Fike, Minka Kelly, and Demetrius "Lil Meech" Flenory Jr. were added to the cast. On August 24, 2022, Ferreira announced via Instagram story that she had decided to leave the series. On April 5, 2023, she said: "I just felt like, maybe it's like I overstayed my welcome a little bit. So for me, I actually felt good to be like, 'Okay, I get to not worry about this, and we both don't get too worried about this', because it's exhausting." In July 2024, Colman Domingo confirmed that he would be reprising his role as Ali Muhammad in the third season.Primary photography takes place in Sony Pictures Studios in Culver City, California. Grant High School in Los Angeles stands in for the fictional East Highland High School. The exterior of the Bennett family house that appears in the pilot of season 1 is located at 5611 Shenandoah Ave, Los Angeles, CA 90056, USA. According to the California Film Commission, the first season of Euphoria received $8,378,000 in incentive tax credits. The first season was filmed over a combined total of 104 days; the second season's production costs totaled $96,685,000 after a total of 176 filming days. Subsequently, the second season received a $19,406,000 tax credit for employing over 15,000 people in California. Zendaya received $500,000 per episode in the first two seasons and will receive $1,000,000 per episode in the third season.For season three, Rue's sobriety journey, Zendaya opened up about exploring characters outside high school, with the filming locations of Dublin, London, New York City, Rome, Singapore, and Warner Bros. Studios lots in Burbank and Leavesden, and a time jump to 2024. The filming is scheduled to begin in January 2025.The visual style of Euphoria is heavily inspired by the work of Petra Collins.
Euphoria employs hyper-stylized cinematography, set design, costume design, and editing, which presents an "emotional realism" that captures the inner perspectives of the series's adolescent characters. The first season was shot digitally using the Arri Alexa 65 camera. The two special episodes and second season were shot on Kodak 35mm film stock, primarily Ektachrome, which cinematographer Marcell Rév attributed to a desire to invoke "some sort of memory of high school".The series often utilizes saturated colors, notably of purple and blue, to communicate the emotional state of its characters. Shades of green and yellow regularly symbolize distress, while purple and blue convey an elated, feverish atmosphere. In shooting both day and night exteriors, cinematographer Marcell Rév relied on an exaggerated orange-blue color scheme, translated in the use of backlights and tungsten lights, to create visuals that feel "almost dreamlike". LED lights and SkyPanels were used in several interior shoots to display bright and vivid colors of purple and blue. The second season of Euphoria was shot on film, specifically in Kodak's Ektachrome and Vision3 500T, which distorted how set lighting looked on camera."For camera movements, we really wanted it to have a certain energy that ties the different storylines together. So, I would say the camera movement is the glue in the show, that glues it together" said Rév on using an energized design element that stands out. Extensive whip pans and tracking shots were employed to portray intimacy, growth, and interrelationship. In the fourth episode of first season "Shook Ones Pt. II", a 2-minute tracking shot, achieved  through the use of a dolly, a technocrane, and four camera stitches, was "to introduce a space where all [the] characters were present, and somehow connect them in one shot".The costume design of Euphoria is arguably the series' most notable and influential hallmark. The characters of the series are regularly shown in chic, flamboyant outfits that serve as "plot devices and psychological profiles" to represent their personalities and character arcs. For example, in the first season, costume designer Heidi Bivens dressed Jules, a transgender woman, in a wardrobe consisting of bright pastels and tennis skirts, inspired by the character's interest in anime and fantasy, to embody "the youthful optimism that comes with a fresh start" and her journey to "conquer" femininity, but as the character explores her gender identity and becomes more disillusioned between the first and second seasons, she "slips into a slightly muted, darker and more androgynous" wardrobe.The visual aesthetics of Euphoria has been compared to the German expressionism movement of the early 20th century.Euphoria's score was composed by English singer, songwriter, and record producer Labrinth. The song "All for Us", performed by Labrinth and Zendaya, is hinted at throughout season 1 before being performed as a large musical number at the end of the season finale. Labrinth makes an appearance in the series alongside Zendaya to perform their song "I'm Tired".When you look back to your teenage days, it feels semi-magical but semi-crazy and semi-psychotic. I wanted to make sure the music felt like those things.—Labrinth to Rolling StoneThe series also makes extensive use of popular music, including hip hop, trap, R&B, experimental, indie rock, standards and doo-wop, with some episodes featuring over 20 songs. For their work on Euphoria's first season, music supervisors Jen Malone (who also supervises the FX series Atlanta) and Adam Leber won the 2020 Guild of Music Supervisors Award for Best Music Supervision in a Television Drama.The score album for the first season was released by Sony Masterworks through Milan Records on October 4, 2019, for digital download. The album was also released on vinyl on January 10, 2020. The score has been described as "the holy lilt of gospel, orchestral and electronic" and was favorably reviewed by Variety.The score album for the second season was released by Columbia Records on April 22, 2022, in digital and physical formats. Like the previous one, it was composed and produced by Labrinth.A soundtrack album featuring a selection of songs from the first season and specials was released by Interscope Records digitally on May 14, 2021, with vinyl copies released on September 3, 2021.The soundtrack to season 2 was released digitally by Interscope Records on March 4, 2022, with CDs releasing on May 13, 2022, and vinyl on July 29, 2022. The album's release was preceded by seven singles, "Watercolor Eyes" by Lana Del Rey, "How Long" by Tove Lo, "(Pick Me Up) Euphoria" by James Blake featuring Labrinth, "Sad4Whattt" by EricDoa, "Yeh I Fuckin' Did it" by Labrinth, "I'm Tired" by Labrinth and Zendaya, and "Elliot's Song" by Dominic Fike and Zendaya.In an interview with IndieWire, Labrinth stated of the soundtrack's religious undertones: "We spoke about using organs because of a lot of the religious influences in the show, especially with Rue. We wanted a lot of the sounds edging towards a religious sound. And because I love both Pentecostal and Catholic sounds, I kind of was like trying to merge them both together."Many of the episode titles for season one are references to late-1990s and early-2000s song titles that correlate to the episode itself. For instance, "'03 Bonnie and Clyde" is a reference to the 2002 Jay-Z and Beyoncé song of the same name. The loyal relationship between Nate Jacobs and Maddy Perez in the episode mirrors that between Jay-Z and Beyoncé in the song.The series premiered on June 16, 2019, on HBO. In Southeast Asia, Hong Kong, and Taiwan, it premiered on June 17, 2019, through HBO Asia. In Australia, it premiered on June 17, 2019, through Foxtel. In the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland, it premiered on August 6, 2019, through Sky Atlantic. The specials were released on December 6, 2020[l] (as Part 1: Rue) and January 24, 2021[m] (as Part 2: Jules). The second season premiered on January 9, 2022. A third season is set to premiere in 2025.Like many HBO series,  Euphoria is extensively pirated in the United Kingdom.The first and second seasons (including the two special episodes) were released on DVD on November 1, 2022, by Warner Bros. Home Entertainment. This is the first A24 series not to be released from Lionsgate Home Entertainment. A Blu-ray and 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray are not yet announced.Euphoria's first season was met with a positive response from critics, with praise for its acting (specifically from Zendaya, Sweeney, and Domingo), storyline, visuals, and approach to mature subject matter. However, it met with controversy for the amount of drug use and nudity throughout the show. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the first season has an approval rating of 80%, with an average rating of 7.4/10 based on 100 critical reviews. The site's critical consensus summary states, "a uniquely challenging and illuminating series, held together by a powerfully understated performance from Zendaya". The review aggregator website Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a score of 68 out of 100, based on 26 critics. Ben Travers of IndieWire praised the show's authenticity, how HBO "grounds itself in stark reality", and Zendaya's performance and narration. Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter noted Zendaya's performance and the handling of the subject matter. Pilot Viruet of Observer called the show "visually stunning" and praised the ensemble's performance, but criticized the writing as "shaky, filled with clunky lines", and recommended that the show "keep its focus narrow". Jamila Stewart of Vogue stated that Euphoria still has a palpable impact on where fashion trends fall today.The first of the series's two special episodes, "Trouble Don't Last Always", received widespread critical acclaim for its writing, performances, and shift in tone and content from the first season. On Rotten Tomatoes, the episode has a score of 97%, with an average rating of 8.44/10 based on 23 critical reviews. The website's critical consensus reads, "Euphoria slows down the tempo without losing the beat in a special episode that pairs a raw Zendaya with a steady Colman Domingo to create small screen magic." On Metacritic, the episode has a weighted average score of 84 out of 100, based on 10 reviews.The second of the two special episodes, "Fuck Anyone Who's Not a Sea Blob", also received critical acclaim, with particular praise for Schafer's performance and writing, as well as the episode's distinctive directorial approach, emotional resonance, and exploration of trans identity. On Rotten Tomatoes, it has a score of 96%, with an average rating of 7.9/10 based on 22 critical reviews. The site's critical consensus reads, "By centering on Jules' journey, Fuck Anyone Who's Not a Sea Blob adds welcome depth to her character and gives Hunter Schafer plenty of room to shine." On Metacritic, the episode has an average weighted score of 78 out of 100, based on 10 reviews.The series's second season received mostly positive reviews, with critics praising the performances and visuals but criticizing the pace and characterization. On Rotten Tomatoes, the second season received a score of 80%, with an average rating of 7.05/10 based on 110 reviews. The site's critical consensus reads, "As willfully provocative as ever in its second season, Euphoria still isn't for all tastes—but when its addictive ingredients are mixed just right, the results remain intoxicating." Metacritic assigned the season a score of 74 out of 100 based on 19 reviews. IndieWire's Ben Travers criticized the sexual content but appreciated Zendaya's performance, writing, "After seven of the eight episodes, Season 2 is exactly what a drama seeking to spark conversation fears most: It's skippable." Rebecca Nicholson for The Guardian gave the second season two out of five, writing, "this long-awaited second season has decided to lean into its crueller instincts". USA Today's Patrick Ryan praised the performances of Zendaya, Schafer, and Fike, but wrote that "the new episodes are much less captivating when they shift their focus away from Rue and Jules".The series' premiere averaged 577,000 viewers in its time slot, a number that increased to one million after the same-night linear replay and preliminary viewing on HBO Go/Now. The hashtag #EuphoriaHBO trended number one in the US and number three worldwide on Twitter after the premiere. The first season was the most watched of HBO's series in the 18–49 demographic with episodes averaging 6.6 million viewers. Season 2 premiere drew 2.4 million viewers across all HBO platforms, a series high. It also marked the strongest digital premiere night performance for any episode of an HBO series since HBO Max's launch, until it was dethroned by House of the Dragon. At the end of its second season, it became the second-most-watched HBO series since 2004 (behind Game of Thrones), with episodes averaging 16.3 million viewers until it was surpassed by House of the Dragon. According to Variety, Euphoria became the most tweeted television series of the decade in the US, with more than 30 million tweets related to the series during the second season, 51% more than during Season 1.Some commentators and organizations have criticized the series's explicit content, including self-harm, excessive drug use, and sexual material amongst its teenage characters, content present in other HBO series, including Big Little Lies, Game of Thrones, Girls, Luck, and Westworld. The conservative media advocacy group Parents Television and Media Council called the series "dark, depraved, degenerate and nihilistic", and asked HBO and AT&T to end it. Common Sense Media, which provides information on media's suitability for children, also noted the strong adult themes and advised against teenage viewership. One scene involving more than 30 shots of penises was criticized by both critics and supporters, with Esquire calling it "pointlessly gratuitous". The Guardian wrote that writers and producers should find new and different ways to shock audiences. In 2022, Minka Kelly said she felt discomfort at the quantity of nude scenes in the series. Drug Abuse Resistance Education criticized the series's depiction of drug use, saying that it "chooses to misguidedly glorify and erroneously depict high school student drug use addiction ... and other destructive behaviors as common in today's world". Samuel Getachew wrote in a Culture piece for Vogue that the series' depictions of trauma aestheticize it in a way that his "generation is particularly vulnerable to".  In 2023, Colman Domingo said that he felt the accusations by other series actors of a toxic workplace due to lengthy shoots and the alleged mistreatment of actors, as well as onset chaos during the second season, are overblown.Levinson acknowledged the controversies over the series's content, saying that some parents will be "totally fucking freaked out". Augustine Frizzell, who directed the pilot episode, said that the explicit content should help foster a conversation between parents and teenagers. Levinson also said that he hopes the series "opens up a dialogue" due to the "disconnect between parents and teenagers". Zendaya issued a warning both before the series and season 2 premiere about its "deeply emotional subject matter". HBO voiced objections to some sexually graphic scenes, but said it would not interfere with the series' "creative process". The series includes viewer discretion warnings and a website for mental health and other support group resources. The series has reportedly been censored for sexual or violent content in countries like Malaysia, the Philippines, and Singapore.For the special "Trouble Don't Last Always", see Metcalf, Mitch (December 8, 2020). "Updated: ShowBuzzDaily's Top 150 Sunday Cable Originals & Network Finals: 12.6.2020". Showbuzz Daily. Archived from the original on December 25, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2020.For the special "Fuck Anyone Who's Not a Sea Blob", see Metcalf, Mitch (January 26, 2021). "Updated: ShowBuzzDaily's Top 150 Sunday Cable Originals & Network Finals: 1.24.2021". Showbuzz Daily. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved January 26, 2021.