Emory Andrew Tate III (born 1 December 1986) is an American and British social media personality, businessman, and former professional kickboxer. He gained notoriety for promoting various positions in the manosphere community. His controversial commentary has resulted in his expulsion from various social media platforms and concern that he promotes misogynist views to his audience. As a divisive influencer, Tate has amassed 9.9 million followers on X and was the third-most googled person in 2023, with most British adults aware of who he is. He has been dubbed the "king of toxic masculinity", and is politically described as both right-wing and far-right, and has called himself a misogynist. As of August 2024, Tate is facing five legal investigations—three criminal and two civil—in Romania and the United Kingdom.Tate first began to kickbox in 2005, winning several kickboxing titles in the late 2000s and early 2010s. In 2016, he appeared on the British reality series Big Brother, but was removed, as he was the suspect in an open rape investigation in the United Kingdom. The investigation was later dropped, but Tate was again suspected in 2024. After his kickboxing career, Tate and his brother, Tristan, began operating a webcam model business, then sold online courses. With his audience from his courses, he became prominent as an internet celebrity promoting a hyper-macho view of masculinity. Tate's courses include Hustler's University, which gained 100,000 subscribers and was later rebranded as The Real World, and the secretive War Room group, which the BBC has accused of coercing women into sex work and teaching violence against women. In August 2023, it was estimated that Tate's online ventures generated US$5 million in revenue monthly.In December 2022, Tate and his brother Tristan were arrested in Romania, along with two women. In June 2023, all four were charged with rape, human trafficking, and forming an organised crime group to sexually exploit women. In July, two of their accusers reportedly went into hiding after a campaign of online harassment, and the Tate brothers filed a defamation lawsuit, claiming $5 million in damages against one of the accusers. In March 2024, British police obtained an arrest warrant for the Tate brothers as part of an investigation into rape and human trafficking. In July 2024, they began a civil case against the brothers and a third person for alleged tax evasion. In August, Romanian police raided four properties Tate owns and expanded its investigation to include trafficking minors, sex with a minor, money laundering and attempting to influence witnesses. Tate and his brother have denied all charges and allegations.Emory Andrew Tate III was born on 1 December 1986 at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington, D.C. He is biracial; his African American father Emory Tate (1958–2015) was a chess international master, while his White English mother Eileen Tate worked as a catering assistant. He has a younger brother, Tristan, and a younger sister, Janine. He was raised in Chicago, Illinois, and Goshen, Indiana. After his parents divorced, his mother took him and his brother to Luton, England. He was educated at Halyard High School and Luton Sixth Form College.Tate started practising boxing and other martial arts in 2005, and worked in the television advertising industry to support himself. In November 2008, he was ranked the seventh-best light heavyweight kickboxer in the United Kingdom by the International Sport Kickboxing Association (ISKA). In 2009, he won his first championship at the British ISKA Full Contact Cruiserweight Championship in Derby, won the International Kickboxing Federation British belt and received the top rank in his division across Europe. Tate's kickboxing nickname was "King Cobra".In 2011, Tate won his first International Sport Kickboxing Association (ISKA) world title in a rematch against Jean-Luc Benoît via knockout, having previously lost to Benoît by decision. In 2012, Tate lost to Sahak Parparyan by unanimous decision while challenging for his It's Showtime 85MAX Championship. Later that year, Tate lost the Enfusion championship tournament to Franci Grajš. Before his loss, he was ranked second-best light-heavyweight kickboxer in the world. In 2013, Tate won his second ISKA world title in a 12-round match against Vincent Petitjean, making him world champion in two weight divisions. He defended the ISKA Belt and Won the Enfusion Belt in 2014, making him a four-time world champion before he retired with 31 recorded fights.Tate gained widespread attention in 2016 when he appeared on the British reality show Big Brother's 17th series. While appearing on the show, he came under scrutiny for previously having made homophobic and racist posts on Twitter. He was removed from the show after six days, with producers citing a video apparently showing Tate hitting a woman with a belt. Tate and the woman said that they were friends and that the actions in the video were consensual. Vice later reported that Tate was removed because the show's producers became aware of an ongoing police investigation into him for rape, which closed in 2019 with no charges filed.Tate's website offers training courses on accumulating wealth and "male–female interactions". According to the site, he also operated a webcam studio using his girlfriends as employees. Tate and his brother Tristan started the webcam business, employing as many as 75 webcam models to sell "fake sob stories" to male callers, claiming to have made millions of dollars doing so. According to Mary McNamara, Tate has called himself "a pimp", and The Guardian wrote of his transition from a kickboxer to "a webcam pimp". Tate later acknowledged that the business model was a "total scam".In August 2023, it was estimated that Hustler's University and The War Room generated $5 million monthly from subscriptions.Tate operated Hustler's University, a platform where members paid a US$49.99 monthly membership fee to receive instruction on ways to make money outside traditional employment, such as cryptocurrency, copywriting, and e-commerce, which was facilitated by prerecorded videos and a Discord server. The site employed an affiliate marketing program, where members received a commission for recruiting others to the platform. Tate became prominent in 2022 by encouraging members of Hustler's University to post videos of him to social media platforms in an effort to maximise engagement. In August 2022, the platform had amassed over 100,000 subscribers, the Irish-American financial services company Stripe pulled out of processing subscriptions for the platform, and Hustler's University shut down its affiliate marketing program. Paul Harrigan, a marketing professor at the University of Western Australia, said the affiliate program was a social media pyramid scheme. After Hustler's University shut down, Tate launched a rebranded version of it called "The Real World" in October 2022.In January 2024, analysis from the Center for Countering Digital Hate found The Real World had generated 450 million views. Another channel sharing the content had gained nearly 300 million views after bypassing social media bans using affiliate marketing schemes.The War Room promotes self-discipline, motivation and confidence building whilst giving members access to thousands of professionals from around the world who encourage personal responsibility and accountability, emphasising the importance of taking ownership of your choices and actions.Andrew Tate, August 2023Advertised by Tate and costing $8,000, the War Room is described as "a global network in which exemplars of individualism work to free the modern man from socially induced incarceration". It claims to teach men "physical, mental, emotional, spiritual, and financial development". The alleged leader of the group, Miles Sonkin, also known as Iggy Semmelweiss, met Tate in 2018, and the group was established in 2019. In August 2023, a BBC investigation led by Matt Shea discovered evidence of women groomed into online sex work by members of the group, described as an all-male secretive society.The group chat, featuring 12,000 pages of encrypted messages, indicated that the group taught a "Pimpin' Hoes Degree" course, abbreviated to PhD, using techniques to "romantically seduce, emotionally manipulate and socially isolate women before luring them into performing on webcams". A legal expert in human trafficking from Bucharest described the course as using all the practices of the "Lover Boy" strategy. A deleted description of the defunct course on the website that prosecutors in Romania have since used in the case against Tate read:My job was to meet a girl, go on a few dates, sleep with her, test if she's quality, get her to fall in love with me to where she'd do anything I say, and then get her on webcam so we could become rich together,Evidence suggested violence against women was also taught and discussed. Victims said sex was used as a manipulation technique. Members of the group believed they were performing "Pavlovian conditioning" on the women, with submission tests such as receiving tattoos on their bodies of members' initials. A whistleblower, who claimed to be former head of sales and marketing, described the group as a cult he had been "brainwashed" by. A spokesperson for Tate said that the BBC's findings "not only present false accusations, but insult the massive community that considers Andrew Tate a life-changing positive force". As of August 2022, there were 434 members and 45 potential victims, based on the leaked chat logs.Tate is an influencer in the 'manosphere' and 'alpha male' community, described as both right-wing and far-right. According to The Conversation, he is a recognised "thought leader" in the online manosphere who mobilises his supporters to spread his ideas to a broader audience. He otherwise identifies as a libertarian and has been dubbed the "king of toxic masculinity". Tate's divisive commentary has been criticised by various charities and organisations, including the Anti-Defamation League, White Ribbon Campaign, Hope not Hate, Rape Crisis England and Wales, Centre for Countering Digital Hate, Institute for Strategic Dialogue, End Violence Against Women Coalition, and Women's Aid.In 2017 Tate received attention for his tweets describing his view of what qualifies as sexual harassment amid the Harvey Weinstein sexual abuse cases, and for tweeting several times that sexual assault victims share responsibility for their assaults. He has been criticised for saying that depression "isn't real" and that women "belong in the home", "can't drive", and are "given to the man and belong to the man" as "a man's property". Tate has also said that men prefer dating 18- and 19-year-olds, because they are "likely to have had sex with fewer men", in order to "make an imprint" on teenagers, and that women who do not stay home are "hoes". According to Tate, some of his comments were intended as jokes and have been taken out of context.You can't slander me because I will state right now that I am absolutely sexist and I'm absolutely a misogynist, and I have fuck you money and you can't take that away.Andrew Tate, 2021Tate is associated with far-right ideologies and individuals, including British activist Tommy Robinson. Before 2022, Tate became known among the online far-right through his appearances on InfoWars and acquaintances including Mike Cernovich, Jack Posobiec, and Paul Joseph Watson. He attended the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC) in 2019. Hope not Hate accuses Tate of a "long history of racist statements, homophobia and links to the organised far-right". In February 2023, Thierry Baudet, founder and leader of the far-right Forum for Democracy, called Tate an "outspoken political dissident" and "courageous critic", tabling a motion in the Dutch parliament regarding his detention in Romania.In a June 2023 interview with the BBC, Tate said that he was "acting under the instruction of God to do good things" and that "I preach hard work, discipline. I'm an athlete, I preach anti-drugs, I preach religion, I preach no alcohol, I preach no knife crime." In September, Tate came out in support of Russell Brand after multiple women accused Brand of sexual assault. In November, he accused Israel of "genociding" Palestinians and said that the Hamas attack on Israel was as "an eye for an eye". In December, during a dispute with Piers Morgan, Tate called conspiracy theorist Alex Jones a "fucking hero" after Jones's reinstatement on Twitter.In January 2024, Tate questioned whether the Nazis were really the "bad guy" in World War II. In March, the ADL reported that Tate "teaches his acolytes that women are inferior and morally deficient beings who are good only for sex and status building, and who deserve to be physically, sexually and emotionally abused", equating his philosophy to that of pick-up artists. On 26 March, after the collapse of the Francis Scott Key bridge in Maryland, Tate falsely claimed the ship that collided with the bridge "was cyber-attacked".By May 2024, far-right conservatives such as Tucker Carlson and Candace Owens had platformed Tate as a proponent of "traditional views on men in the culture war raging over gender". In August, Tate was accused of inciting online hate after becoming one of the first influencers to amplify misinformation about the Southport stabbing, leading to the far-right riots in the UK. The Conversation called Tate "not explicitly far right" but otherwise as a figure who has promoted far-right propaganda, including the great replacement conspiracy theory.Beginning in 2022, Tate's views and their influence on teenage boys and young men have become a particular concern of parents, teachers and mental health experts in much of the world, including North America, the United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand. The New York Times has described his views as "brainwashing a generation", due to his influence in British schools, and the Anti-Defamation League considers Tate's misogyny mainstream.In August 2022, the White Ribbon Campaign, a nonprofit organisation opposing male-on-female violence, called Tate's commentary "extremely misogynistic" and its possible long-term effects on his young male audience "concerning". Hope not Hate asserted that Tate's social media presence might present a "dangerous slip road into the far-right" for his audience and criticised his ties to the far right. The Rape Crisis England and Wales said it is "unacceptable that such a blatant display of misogyny is being given a platform". The Centre for Countering Digital Hate called Tate's videos "extreme misogyny" after uncovering videos viewed millions of times referencing leaving an imprint on young women. In response to these criticisms, Tate said that his content includes "many videos praising women" and mainly aims to teach his audience to avoid "toxic and low-value people as a whole". He added that he plays a "comedic character" and that people believe "absolutely false narratives" about him.In February 2023, Tim Squirrell of the Institute for Strategic Dialogue said Tate posed "a risk of radicalising young men into misogynist extremism". In May, Hope not Hate's director of policy called Tate a "legitimising force" for misogynistic views and the End Violence Against Women Coalition's director said it is "hugely concerning" that "Tate continues to wield influence on a significant proportion of younger men, who say they agree with his views on women, masculinity and how to be a man." According to interviews by The Conversation in mid–2023, teachers explicitly identified Tate's influence on students in reference to a dramatic increase in "sexism, misogyny and sexual harassment" in Australian classrooms. In October, UK domestic abuse charity Women's Aid called Tate's content a proxy for misogyny and sexism, saying, "the popularity of Tate is not a phenomenon in and of itself and, instead, is a current representation of existing misogyny".In a 2024 interview with Empire magazine, actor James McAvoy said that his character Paddy in the movie Speak No Evil was inspired by Tate.In February 2023, courses for teachers in the United Kingdom on how to address Tate's views sold out. Of what was called violent misogyny and other forms of extremist content that Tate distributes online, the head of UK counter-terror policing has said, "I'm concerned about the effect of that kind of rhetoric in the minds of young boys". In April 2023, the Department for Education (DfE) discouraged discussion of Tate, with many citing his influence regarding sexual harassment and misogynistic incidents. The co-founder of the charity Diversify expressed frustration over the refusal to provide any resources or training for teachers.In October 2023, the Australian government allocated AUD$3.5 million (£1.8 million) to counter "harmful gender stereotypes perpetuated online" in response to young fans of Tate who have been described as "increasingly bringing misogynist views into Australian schools". According to researchers at Monash University, Australian teachers have quit their jobs, students openly espoused "male supremacist" views, and Tate's views have shaped the way boys treat women and girls.In February 2024, the Shadow Education Secretary in the UK, Bridget Phillipson, said the Labour Party wanted to use male role models to counter the misogyny of influencers such as Tate. The proposal would implement "peer-to-peer mentoring" programs for school staff in order to directly address the impact of Tate and others. The general secretary of the National Education Union, Daniel Kebede, welcomed the plans, saying, "schools would welcome more support on how to respond to the online sexism and sexual harassment".In January 2023, a survey by "The Man Cave" of 500 teenage Australian boys found that 28 per cent looked up to Tate and 36 per cent found him relatable. Of 24 schools, half said they were "seeing a significant and negative impact of his influence on our boys in the school". The next month, a survey by Hope not Hate found that eight in ten British males aged 16–17 had viewed Tate's content, with 45 per cent of British males aged 16–24 having a positive view of him, compared to 1 per cent of British girls aged 16 and 17.In September 2023, YouGov data found that 26 per cent of men aged 18–29 and 28 per cent of men aged 30–39 agreed with Tate's views on women. Of the 63 per cent of British adults who had heard of Tate, 6 per cent held a positive view, with men making up 12 per cent and women 3 per cent of views, while about half had a negative view.In October 2023, a survey by Women's Aid and ORB International found that 40 per cent of 7–18 year-olds had heard of Tate, including 21 per cent of 7–11 year-olds and 43–53 per cent of 11–18 year-olds. The report found a correlation between being exposed to Tate's content and having harmful perceptions of relationships, with children exposed to such content being "five times more likely to think hurting people is OK".In February 2024, research by King's College London, the Center for Women's Global Leadership, and Ipsos found that one in five men aged 16–29 who had heard of Tate held a favourable view, compared to 7 per cent of women in the same age group. Based on the survey of over 3,700 respondents aged 16 and over, only 6 per cent held a favourable view, while more than three out of four held an unfavourable view. One in seven agreed with his views on male identity and gender roles and 61 per cent disagreed.Tate became widely known in mid-2022 and was searched on Google more times than both Donald Trump and COVID-19 that July. In August, The Guardian reported that videos of Tate on TikTok had been viewed 11.6 billion times. In December 2023, Tate had over 8.5 million followers on X (Twitter), an increase of 5 million since December 2022. As of August 2024, Tate has 9.9 million followers on X. He was the third-most googled person in 2023, and his Wikipedia article was ranked among the top 25 English Wikipedia articles in 2023.yes, please do enlighten me. email me at smalldickenergy@getalife.comDecember 28, 2022Hello @GretaThunbergI have 33 cars.My Bugatti has a w16 8.0L quad turbo.My TWO Ferrari 812 competizione have 6.5L v12s.This is just the start.Please provide your email address so I can send a complete list of my car collection and their respective enormous emissions.December 27, 2022In December 2022, Tate addressed the environmentalist Greta Thunberg in a tweet extolling his carbon-emitting automobiles and asked for her email address to give her more information. Thunberg replied with the fake, satirical email address "smalldickenergy@getalife.com". The exchange received substantial attention on Twitter, with Thunberg's retort quickly becoming one of the most-liked tweets ever.Tate gained notoriety on social media for promoting a "hyper-masculine, ultra-luxurious lifestyle" and a "hyper-macho image". According to The Guardian in February 2023, Tate is popular among British teenage boys, who mimic his phrases and philosophies. It reported that "virtually every parent in Britain" had heard of him, and that parents and schoolteachers expressed concern that he was influencing boys to exhibit misogynistic and aggressive behaviour. CNN reported that students as young as middle schoolers regurgitate his abuse and harass female classmates. In the UK and Australia, sexual harassment in schools has also been blamed on Tate's influence.In January 2024, the Center for Countering Digital Hate found that YouTube had earned up to £2.4 million in advertising revenue from Tate's content and accused YouTube of being "happy to continue to turn a blind eye". YouTube called the figure "wildly inaccurate and overinflated", highlighting that most channels are not monetised for such revenue.Three of Tate's Twitter accounts have been suspended at different times. In 2021, an account he created to evade his previous ban was verified by Twitter, contrary to its policies. The account was subsequently permanently banned, and Twitter said the verification occurred in error.In August 2022, after an online campaign to deplatform him, Tate was permanently banned from Facebook and Instagram, losing 4.7 million followers from the latter. Parent company Meta said he had violated its policy on "dangerous organizations and individuals". TikTok, where videos featuring Tate's name as a hashtag have been viewed over 13 billion times, also removed his account after determining that it violated their policies on "content that attacks, threatens, incites violence against, or otherwise dehumanises an individual or a group". Shortly thereafter, YouTube suspended his channel, which had 760,000 subscribers, citing multiple violations, including hate speech and COVID-19 misinformation. Tate later deleted his own Twitch channel, which had 50,000 subscribers. In November 2022, after Elon Musk acquired Twitter, Tate's Twitter account was reinstated.Tate responded to the bans by saying that, while most of his comments were taken out of context, he took responsibility for how they were received. The YouTuber and boxer Jake Paul denounced Tate's sexism but characterised the bans as censorship. Tate's content continues to circulate on Facebook, Instagram, and TikTok via fan accounts. After the bans, Tate moved to alt-tech platforms Gettr and Rumble, causing the latter to briefly become the most downloaded app on the App Store.In 2017, Tate and his brother moved from the United Kingdom to Romania, where they run multiple businesses. Tate said that he moved because he liked "living in countries where corruption is accessible for everybody" and believed he would be less likely to face rape charges in Romania. He said that Romanian police ask women reporting rapes for "evidence" or "CCTV proof", whereas in the Western world during the #MeToo movement any woman "at any point in the future can destroy your life". Tate reportedly has a number of children living in Romania whom he occasionally visits.Tate was raised Christian but later became an atheist. By early 2022, he identified as a Christian again, and said that he tithed £16,000 to the Romanian Orthodox Church monthly. After a video of him praying at a mosque in Dubai went viral in October 2022, he announced on his Gettr account that he had converted to Islam.On 4 March 2023, while incarcerated in Romania, Tate's legal team said that "he has a dark spot on his lung, most likely a tumor" following a medical consultation in Dubai, sparking online rumours about whether he has lung cancer. On 5 March, Tate denied on Twitter that he had cancer.Tate was arrested in July 2015 after two women filed complaints accusing him of rape and assault in 2014. He was again arrested on suspicion of rape in December 2015, after an accuser presented messages from Tate in which he wrote, "I love raping you". In response to the allegations, a spokesperson for Tate said, "Andrew vehemently denies any involvement in criminal activities such as rape or physical abuse."In 2019, after a four-year investigation, the Crown Prosecution Service declined to file charges for any of the allegations for sexual violence and physical abuse, saying the evidence "did not meet our legal test, and there was no realistic prospect of a conviction", and that "it would be wrong to say there was just one issue" with the evidence. The three women have said the case was mishandled, with the police apologising for delays in the investigation; according to Tate, the police "found [exculpatory] messages from the girls' phones".In March 2024, the UK's Westminster Magistrates' Court issued a European arrest warrant against Andrew and Tristan Tate. According to Tate's representative, the charges are based on allegations of sexual aggression from 2012 to 2015. Bedfordshire police said the warrant was "part of an ongoing investigation into allegations of rape and human trafficking", alongside Romanian authorities. Romanian police detained the two on 11 March after the prosecutor of the Bucharest Court of Appeal ordered them to be detained for a day until the court decided on the execution of the warrant. On 12 March, the Romanian court ruled that the brothers can be extradited to the UK only after the Romanian trial for human trafficking concludes. The Tate brothers "categorically reject all charges".According to the lawyer representing the accusers, Matthew Jury, they received information that Tate had told Adin Ross he planned to flee Romania, and requested British police have him detained. Jury also called on Piers Morgan and Tucker Carlson to no longer give Tate a platform, or otherwise to "properly interrogate him on the allegations", describing the spread of disinformation over the allegations in the UK and elsewhere as damaging.In May 2024, the three women involved in the investigation with Hertfordshire constabulary, along with a fourth British woman, brought a civil case against Tate in the High Court to sue for "injuries they suffered". Papers were served at his home in Romania. According to the women, the court granted them anonymity to protected them from harassment and abuse.In July 2024, Devon and Cornwall Police began civil proceedings against Tate, Tristan, and a woman referred to only as "J". The three are accused of paying no tax in any country for their online businesses, including Hustlers' University and War Room, amounting to £21 million in revenue between 2014 and 2022. The force is attempting to recover £2.8 million from several frozen bank accounts.On 11 April 2022, the US embassy received a report that an American citizen was being held against her will in a property the Tate brothers own in Pipera, Romania. Romanian police raided the home and a nearby webcam studio belonging to the Tates, where they discovered four women. Two of them, the American and another Romanian woman, told the police they were being held against their will, sparking an in-rem[b] investigation into human trafficking and rape by DIICOT, the Romanian anti-organised crime agency. The Tate brothers were interrogated and released. At the time, they were heard as witnesses rather than suspects.On 29 December 2022, the police arrested the Tates and two women. All four are suspected of human trafficking and forming an organised crime group, and one of them (unidentified, per Romanian law) is suspected of rape. DIICOT accuses the Tates of having recruited women through the "loverboy" method—which consists of misrepresenting one's intention to commit to a romantic relationship—and forcing them to create explicit content for websites like OnlyFans as part of an organised crime group the Tates are alleged to have formed in early 2021. DIICOT identified six potential victims. Social media rumours attributed Andrew Tate's arrest to pizza boxes shown in his response video to Greta Thunberg, which Romanian authorities denied.As of 5 January 2023, two potential victims had joined the case as civil parties and filed statements against the suspects. On 7 January, one of the Tates' lawyers said the defense team had still not obtained a copy of the evidence the prosecution presented to the judge. The lawyer also said that the Tates had not been given an accurate translation during their hearing for the 30-day extension. He requested the opportunity to confront the accusers in court and said that some of the six alleged victims DIICOT identified had not filed a complaint against the Tates. Two women who have lived with the Tates have publicly defended them, and two of the six alleged victims DIICOT identified have denied that they were victimised.Romanian authorities seized 29 assets, including 15 cars, more than 10 properties, watches, and sums of money, that belonged to the Tates or their companies, totaling almost US$4 million. If the Tates are convicted, these assets will be forfeited to the state and used to pay civil and moral damages to any victims. On 14 January 2023, the cars at the Tates' home were transported to a storage location. On 11 December, a Romanian court rejected a request to return assets seized during the investigation. On 8 January 2024, the Bucharest Court of Appeal overturned this decision on appeal and ordered a new trial over the seized assets.On 21 August 2024, Romanian police expanded their investigation against Tate to include trafficking minors, sex with a minor, money laundering and attempting to influence witnesses. DIICOT raided four homes belonging to Tate in Ilfov County and Bucharest in connection with new accusations and the criminal case of setting up an organised criminal group. The next day, Tate and his brother, whose property was also raided, were among six people taken into custody for allegations related to the raids. Both Romanians and foreigners were among those arrested. Prosecutors said the new investigation involves 35 alleged victims, including a women who was a minor at the time. The accused are alleged to have made a total of $2.8m via "sexual exploitation". The Tate brothers have denied all the allegations.On 13 June 2023, DIICOT adjusted the charges from human trafficking to "human trafficking in continued form", a more serious charge. One additional victim was identified, bringing the total to seven. On 20 June, the four accused were indicted on charges of rape, human trafficking, and forming an organised crime group to sexually exploit women. They continue to deny all charges and remain under investigation for money laundering and trafficking of minors. Tate's attorney argues that Tate was playing an online character, while Tate and his supporters have spread various conspiracy theories about the criminal charges.Sky News reported that the allegations include committing "human trafficking in Romania and other countries", including the United States and United Kingdom. ABC News reported that the case centres around three women—of American, Moldovan, and British nationality—who accuse the Tates of "luring [them] to Romania and exploiting them on webcam". According to the Anti-Defamation League, "Prosecutors allege that Tate raped at least one of the women repeatedly, controlled them by threatening them with violence and financial ruin and posted pornographic videos to the women's social media accounts."In January 2024, the case was heard in the preliminary chamber before a trial date was set. In April, a Romanian court ruled that all the four defendants could be tried in the country, without specifying a trial date. The Bucharest Tribunal decided that the case against Tate "met the legal criteria". The defendants have appealed the ruling.After an initial 24-hour pre-trial detention following the arrests on 29 December 2022, the judge prolonged their detention by 30 days. The Tates appealed the extension, but the appeal was rejected on 10 January 2023. Under Romanian law, it can be prolonged for a maximum of 180 days. On 20 January, a Romanian court extended the brothers' pre-trial detention to 27 February; the court's reasoning was based on a desire to safeguard the investigation and prevent the Tates from leaving the country. On 25 January, while being taken for questioning at Romania's organised crime unit, Andrew said the case against him was "empty" and told reporters that "they know we have done nothing wrong".On 1 February, Tate appealed the decision to extend his detention. The Bucharest Court of Appeal rejected his appeal. That same day, Tina Glandian, a lawyer who previously represented Chris Brown and Mike Tyson, was added to the defense team. She released a public statement alleging that the situation constituted a "violation of international human rights". On 21 February, a Romanian judicial institution prolonged the Tate brothers' detention for 30 more days. Prosecutors allege wiretaps of phone calls made by Tate to two associates, instructing them to lobby two Romanian right-wing politicians, George Simion and Diana Iovanovici Șoșoacă, to support his release.On 14 March, their petition for bail was refused for the third time. On 29 March, their detention period was lengthened until the end of April. On 31 March, the Bucharest Court of Appeal overturned the previous court's decision, transitioning the brothers' pre-trial detention to house arrest, initially set until 29 April and later extended to the end of August. In total, the four suspects, including the Tate brothers, were held in police custody from 29 December 2022 until 31 March 2023.On 4 August, their house arrest was replaced by judicial control until 2 October, allowing the four to leave their house but not Ilfov County. On 28 September, the travel restriction was relaxed after an appeal, allowing Tate to travel within Romania. The decision was overturned on appeal, but restrictions were again relaxed by a Romanian judge on 28 November.On 30 January 2024, the Bucharest Court of Appeal rejected Tate's appeal to relax judicial control measures, after pre-trial restrictions imposed on 18 January were extended another 60 days. The restrictions determine that he cannot leave the country. On 10 May, The Bucharest Tribunal extended the same travel restrictions another 60 days, and on 20 May, Tate lost his appeal in the Bucharest Court of Appeal to have the restrictions relaxed. On 5 July, a Bucharest court announced that the Tate brothers were no longer restricted to travel only within Romania. The travel restriction was lifted, allowing the Tate brothers to travel freely within the EU. That ruling was reversed by the Bucharest Court of Appeal on 16 July.On 21 August, the Tate brothers were held for questioning as part of a new investigation against them. A hearing was held at which a Romanian judge placed Tate under house arrest for at least 30 days amid new allegations of human trafficking and sexual intercourse with a minor. The arrests came one day after Romanian police raided his home in the country. Tristan was placed under judicial custody.On 5 September, the Bucharest Court of Appeal turned down prosecutors' request to jail Andrew, keeping him under house arrest. Tristan was allowed to be kept in judicial custody, but he and Andrew were allowed to communicate with the alleged victims they have children with and who deny the allegations against them.In February 2023, the Tates' legal team confirmed that a cease and desist letter was sent to at least one of the accusers in December 2022, threatening to sue her and her parents for $300 million over defamatory statements.Two of the accusers reportedly went into hiding after being targeted by an online harassment campaign, described as an attempt to "scare them into silence" by a "troll army". Senior legal counsel at the National Center on Sexual Exploitation, who are advising the women, alleges Tate's following targeted her clients with thousands of online threats, including doxing the accusers, their relatives, as well as the use of private investigators.In July 2023, the Tate brothers filed a defamation lawsuit against one of the accusers, their parents and two other people, in Palm Beach County, Florida, seeking $5 million in damages. The Tates claim the five conspired to falsely accuse them of human trafficking and rape, costing them their freedom as well as income from social media and business ventures. Palm Beach County Circuit Judge Joseph Curley allowed the brothers' lawsuit against the accuser to proceed in July 2024, while dismissing the allegations they made against her parents and some of the allegations they made against her.In January 2024, U.S. District Judge Robin L. Rosenberg dismissed another of the brothers' defamation lawsuits. They had sued a former United States Marine Corps sergeant who reported Tate to the U.S. Embassy in Romania and military officials, leading to his arrest by Romanian authorities. Rosenberg ruled that the sergeant had assisted the authorities in their investigation and had done what the law encourages people to do against those they suspect of engaging in a crime.